Well, good morning to you, church family.
We have been walking verse by verse through second Corinthians chapter 10.
We're really beginning with second Corinthians chapter one.
And we've made our way now to chapter 10.
And we're looking at passages here that normally you probably would never hear a sermon on, but oftentimes in the most unsuspecting of places you find the greatest treasures.
I want to take you back to Gideon.
In the Old Testament, when all of the people along with Gideon rose very early in the morning, the battle lines had been drawn.
The Gideonites, as you remember, had been harassing God's people for the last seven years, and they drove Israel to retreat into the local mountains and caves.
And in the midst of that, God called up one of the most unlikely of men, and he promised to be with him to deliver God's people through him.
And he called Gideon, quote, a mighty man of valor.
Gideon presented an offering before the Lord, and the Lord strengthened him, and the Lord assured him through a sign of his presence.
And Gideon went throughout the land, and he crushed their idol.
And the people then were waiting for their marching orders to move forward.
And in the midst of that, the Lord revealed one of the most bizarre battle tactics ever known to man.
In Judges 7, chapter seven, verse two we read, the Lord said to Gideon, the people with you are too many for me to give the Midianites into their hand, the less to Israel,
boast over me saying, my own hand has saved me.
And so the Lord reduced their number 32,000 already, not a mighty number before such a formidable army.
And he began to whittle it down until they only had 300 people so that there is no way they could boast of their own flesh of any victory.
in 1 Kings chapter 20 verse 11.
The king of Syria gathered his army together.
He recruited 32 other kings and he again threatened to harass and plunder Israel to take their wealth, to take their wives, to take their children.
And before his threats, which were unprovoked, we read in 1 Kings 20,
verse 11, and the king of Israel answered, tell him, let not the one who straps on his armor boast himself as he who takes it off.
In other words, we have smack talk in the ancient world.
You talk a big game, but if you're going to boast, why don't you boast after you finish the job not before?
Emma's eye, a king of Judah, was warned in 2 Chronicles 25, 19, quote, your heart has lifted you up in boastfulness.
Stay home.
And he refused to stay home.
And he suffered a slaughter as a result of his boastfulness.
Men would boast against Moses.
And as a result, God would swallow them up in judgment, literally in the earth.
In the New Testament, King Herod boasted.
The people began to treat him like a God, and King Herod received that as worship from the people, and the Bible says that an angel struck him down for refusing to give glory to God, and he was eaten by worms.
Friends, the Bible is filled with boasting, both good boasting and bad boasting.
And I believe the reason is because man naturally is a very boastful creature.
In Second Corinthians 10, scripture gives us a prescription for how we should boast, how we should not boast.
But we know that we live in a very boastful world.
Have you been on social media lately?
Filled with pictures and posts of
I'm not bragging, but we all really know that you're bragging.
What about public leaders?
Do public leaders love to boast of themselves?
The truth is that in one way or another, we all love to boast of what we think we are, of what we think we've accomplished.
And I believe we live in a world where many people, and if we're not careful, including us,
are very prone to being insecure.
And so if we're not careful, we will begin to present ourselves in a boastful way to try to make up on the outside for what we know is lacking on the inside.
The idea of boasting, I believe stems from insecurity from pride, obviously from sin in the most negative way.
And it's a
It's an attempt to promote oneself.
Maybe who you think you are, maybe what you have, maybe thinking what you can do or what you have done.
I want to look this morning at the title of my sermon, which is the measure of a man and his ministry.
How should we consider ourselves?
How should we or should we not boast?
How should we consider ourselves before God and before one another?
How do we measure ourselves?
Should we compare ourselves one with another?
Should we ever put ourselves forward?
Is it possible that we can be plagued with the fear of man and a desire incessantly to please other people and make them think that we are more than in fact, we truly are?
Is there a standard, a measuring stick?
Is there a metric by which we may properly consider ourselves and measure faithful ministry?
Look with me in 2 Corinthians chapter 10, false teachers are continuing to ravage this church in Corinth.
Even as many have repented, there's a remaining faction that have not repented in the church, and there are false teachers at the heart of this.
If you look with me in verses 7 through 11, we saw last Sunday that it appears Paul was accused of boasting of being overconfident, maybe even as being
authoritarian, a heavy handed towards the church, seeking to frighten and even destroy them.
And Paul laid out what I have described as five aspects of authority that he displays in the church.
Look with me in verse seven.
We see authority that's securing Christ and not selfish and motive.
We saw in verse eight, number two, authority that's assertive and not arrogant.
Thirdly, we saw in verse eight, authority that builds up and doesn't tear down.
We saw in verses nine and 10, authority that puts terror in your enemies and loving respect in your people.
And finally, number five, verse 11, we saw last week authority that is spoken and acted on.
And so Paul is asserting his authority before the church so that they would respond faithfully and humbly before the Lord.
We continue now this morning in 2 Corinthians 10 verses 12 through 18 as we see the measure of a man and his ministry.
I want you to know, first of all, very clearly, number one, we don't measure ourselves by those who commend themselves.
We don't measure ourselves by those who commend themselves.
Do you know people who love to commend themselves?
Are you one of such people?
Look within verse 12 and we're going to we're going to camp out here just for a little bit.
Paul says not that we desire to classify or compare ourselves with some of those who are commending themselves.
But when they measure themselves by one another and compare themselves with one another,
they are without understanding.
Paul frames this entire section that we're in in verse 12 and then circling back around in verse 18 with the word and idea of commending how we are to commend ourselves and how we are not to commend ourselves and how God will commend us.
If you look with me in verse 12, Paul says that he, possibly including his ministry team, refused to classify or to put themselves in the same category as, or to compare themselves with these hucksters who have defrauded the church and are winsomely gaining influence over the people of God.
Some translations have it this way, we don't dare.
We wouldn't have the audacity, a word that Paul uses in this letter to do such a thing, to classify ourselves with the boastful.
Are the King James says, we don't dare put ourselves in their number or class.
It seems very clear from the previous verses that we've already seen that the false teachers and the church at large were comparing Paul's ministry to that of the false teachers.
And many are concluding that Paul simply doesn't measure up to these guys that they have no business trusting.
We saw just last Sunday how the church, at least many within it, seemed to find Paul compared to them lacking in a very persuasive speech.
They speak so much more eloquently, so much more persuasively.
They find Paul lacking in a very powerful persona
And Paul admits, I come to you in weakness, but by the power of God.
Paul says, there's no way I would ever compare myself with such deceitful hucksters.
Look with me in your Bibles with some of those who are committing themselves.
The Geneva translation says, praise themselves.
So they're demeaning Paul for his speech and for his presence.
In chapter 11, they demean him for refusing to accept support from the church.
which they believe would legitimize his ministry.
In chapter 11, verse 22, they seem to demean him for his family lying, for his descendants from the family that he's come from.
In chapter 12, maybe they demean him for his lack of mystical spiritual experiences, maybe even for what they perceived to be his lack of mighty miracles in chapter 12, verse 12.
Scholars say that it was a very common tactic
for teachers of the day to try to win followers to themselves.
And the way they would often do it is they would compare themselves to other teachers.
Is this a tactic today?
Highlighting the absolute worst in other teachers, minimizing the worst in themselves and then walking all over others in order to get to the top of the ladder themselves.
Turn with me in your Bibles to 1 Corinthians chapter 4.
In 1 Corinthians chapter 4, Paul already addresses this idea of comparing and commending, not going beyond one's proper limits, he'll later say.
In 1 Corinthians chapter 4, as we've seen years ago, walking through this passage, Paul bears his soul before the church,
and honesty before God.
And he says in verse one, for I am not aware of anything against myself.
By the way, what a statement.
Are you aware of anything against yourself?
I am.
Can anyone say before God, I am not aware of anything before myself, against myself.
But I am not even then thereby acquitted.
Paul is not perfect, he's blameless.
He's seeking to walk in holiness and repentance.
It is the Lord who judges me.
And he says in verse five, therefore do not pronounce judgment before the time, before the Lord comes, who will bring to light the things now hidden in darkness and will disclose the purposes of the heart.
Be careful judging about by its cover.
Be careful against judging a person or a matter too quickly.
He says, then each one, when God brings all things to life, we'll receive His commendation from God.
I have applied all these things to myself, and He mentions a policy for your benefit, brothers, that you may learn by us not to go beyond what is written.
that none of you be puffed up, be arrogant, boastful in favor of one against another.
It's a very sobering proper assessment.
It's the person who comes before the Lord in their prayers this, Psalm 139, Lord, would you search me even as I search myself, being honest before God about the state of my soul,
And Psalm 19, Lord, would you make it so that the words of my mouth and the meditations of my heart are pleasing in your sight?
Lord, would you forgive me?
Would you help me?
Would you lead me?
Is that the attitude of your heart this morning?
And now, Lord, my conscience is cleansed before you when we pray the prayer of confession.
And then offer a sense of absolution.
We are trusting in the merits of Christ to cleanse us and give us assurance of his pardon.
So Lord, my conscience is clean before you because of the blood of Jesus Christ.
But even then, God alone is the judge.
He knows all things.
So we are very careful about judging a matter too quickly, jumping to conclusions.
What about you?
Have you ever been a little hasty to jump to conclusions about a particular matter?
And then you found yourself like Peter, the disciple, who constantly had to put his foot in his mouth.
I can certainly relate to that.
And God will bring delight in the true motivations of all and he will commend each one.
As it pertains to leaders in the church, which is the matter in 2 Corinthians, 1 Timothy 5 says, be very careful.
Lord knows we've made this mistake as a church in years past.
Be very careful because for some people their sins go before them.
In other words, they wear their sin on their sleeve.
It's very evident.
But for other people, Paul warns Timothy, they follow behind them.
It takes more time to see the character tested, to see what's in the heart come squeezed out of the hands.
For some people, it takes more time.
So don't lay hands on a man hastily, which is exactly the problem in 2 Corinthians, whether they lay hands on them or not is not the matter, but the matter that they have given their influence and heart, submitting to those whom they should not have.
Paul says in 1 Corinthians 8 that food will not commend us to God.
He says in 1 Corinthians 11,
They commends the church for some things, but the way they're handling themselves at the Lord's Supper is not one of them.
Look with me in 2 Corinthians.
We see Paul saying in 2 Corinthians chapter three, verse one, I'm your father in the faith.
Don't make me commend myself to you.
Presenting letters of recommendation, you know me better than that.
He says in chapter 13, verse 12, I should not
have to commend myself to you.
I should be commended by you."
And so Paul says in 2 Corinthians, I'm not boasting of myself.
I'm trying to give you reason to boast in me because my divine calling and the fruitfulness of my ministry should be clear before you.
He says in chapter 6 verse 4 that if we are to commend ourselves, it is with endurance through suffering
on your behalf.
That is the only way I will put myself forward or commend myself.
These men, if you'll look with me in 2 Corinthians 10, 12 are measuring themselves against the metric of one another.
They're comparing themselves with one another and Paul says, this is a fool's errand.
The King James version says,
translation says they are not wise.
The new American standard says they are without understanding.
They refuse to measure themselves before God.
So they measure themselves according to the standard of one another rather than the plum line of God's word.
All it does is bolster their own pride.
And friends, I believe that we can be so
We must be so careful not to do the same ourselves.
I believe the idea here is that regardless of how big they cock their feathers out underneath, all they are is small little birds making a lot of noise.
They may be full of noise, but they are filled with dead men's bones.
Jesus said whitewash tunes.
That's what they are.
All we're seeing in this matter in the Church of Corinth, I believe, is one of the most disgusting things that you will ever find in a church.
It's a sick game of spiritual one-upmanship.
It's the idea that they love to sing their own praises and they're parading themselves to try to figure out who is going to get the most spiritual person of the year award.
And it's all of a sod, it's all fake, there's nothing genuine.
And I am telling you, I have seen that and I have absolutely no interest in it in our church.
They feel mighty about themselves, but only as they compare themselves with one another.
Maybe they're flattering themselves because immediately the tendency is to find other people who look less than you so that your pride can be increased through it.
Or maybe you see other people who in some area are another look greater than you are growing more than you are.
So it provokes envy and jealousy of another person in comparison.
Brothers and sisters, we all have clay feet and clay chests.
And before God, we are all prone to the same things.
And I believe what these false teachers have is what we would often call little man syndrome.
They are small on the inside, so they try to make themselves big on the outside.
Listen to Proverbs 27, two, let another praise you and not your own mouth, a stranger and not your own lips.
Proverbs 26, 12, do you see a man who is wise in his own eyes?
There is more hope for a fool than for him.
How many of you would be willing to confess that you thought when you were growing up, your parents were the dumbest people in the world?
And then as you get in your late teens and in your twenties, you think, I am so wise if the rest of the world would just listen to me and do what I say, this would be a much better place.
And so if we could have had
social media back then, if I could start a book tour, if everyone would just listen to my voice.
And then how many of you get a little older and realize you really weren't so smart like you thought you were and your parents were a little bit more smarter than you thought they were.
And you were not so wise in the eyes of others as you were in your own eyes.
Sit down young man, sit down young lady, learn from the wisdom of others, and don't be so eager to parade yourselves.
And that goes for you older people too.
Comparison is nothing but a very small and corrupt game of jealousy, of insecurity, of coveting, of envy, and of pride.
And I believe it's more pronounced on the surface at least in our day than maybe we have experienced in a long time.
Social media is a hotbed for this fool's errand of comparison.
You ever looked at pictures of other people's families and buddy, they have it all together.
Everybody is in their place looking sharp and smiling.
And you have no clue what they endured right before and right after that one snapshot that they selectively pulled out as a frame of their life to put forward.
Does it feel like everybody lives in a bigger house than you do?
Does it feel like as you hit marks April and May that everyone is at the beach except for you?
Everybody has a nicer car than you.
Everyone's at the mountains, but you, everyone has a godly husband, except for you.
Everyone has a sweet, submissive wife, but you, everyone has great children, but you, anyone susceptible to this gang, thank you for your honest hands and to the rest of you, you are liars and you know it.
And what a timely passage right here to remind us that this is a very small and corrupt game to compare myself with other people on such trivial matters of the way I look and dress, comparing how much money I make or don't make, how much I have, what kind of job I have or don't have, how life has turned out, whatever,
The matter is, it provokes jealousy in some, it provokes pride in others, and it's exactly what we see in Psalm 73.
The psalmist says, God, why is it that the bad guys always win and the good guys always lose?
The people who despise your name get promotions at work and have it all together.
And the people who faithfully serve you, barely keep their head above water.
Lord, why?
And the psalmist does not get a single answer to his question, but he does conclude in Psalm 73, I am nothing but a wild beast.
What's wrong with me, he says, comparing myself, judging matters too soon, not understanding the whole,
He says, I have the Lord and the Lord is with me and his covenant promises are mine forever.
Why would I even think like that?
Look with me in second Corinthians 10, 12, I believe the more specific point in this passage is that the measure of a man in a faithful ministry
is not comparison with self-appointed Charismatics who put themselves forward, but it's using the standard of God's word to evaluate the calling and the character of a person and to see the fruitfulness from a ministry that follows over an extended period of time.
And so we need to be careful the metrics that we use to evaluate what it means to know and love Christ and be godly.
We need to be careful the metrics that we use to judge what it means for us to be a faithful, healthy church.
Galatians five gives us some pretty good metrics.
When it lays out the fruit or the evidences of the flesh versus the fruit of the Holy Spirit in a person's life in a church.
Look with me in one more passage.
Turn with me, if you will, to James chapter three.
The person who begins to get called up into this game of comparison, not only church leaders, but even church members, to try to impress one another with a false pretense of spirituality, the Bible says this is a person who is without understanding.
Look with me in James chapter three, verse 13. Who is wise and what?
Are you there?
Who is wise in understanding among you?
So what does it mean?
And what does it look like to have understanding as a Christian and as a church?
Buy us good conduct, let him show us works in the beingness of wisdom.
But if you have bitter jealousy and selfish ambition in your hearts, and that is the church in Corinth to the core, do not boast
and be false to the truth.
There it is boasting.
This is not wisdom that comes down from above, but is earthly, unspiritual, demonic.
For where jealousy and selfish ambition exist, there will be disorder and every evil practice.
But the wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle,
open to reason, full of mercy and good fruits, impartial and sincere.
No one cares how much you know.
No one cares how well you speak.
No one cares what you have or how you present yourself.
This is the metric of true maturity in a person's life seeking to follow the Lord.
And the harvest of righteousness is sown in peace.
by those who make peace.
Amen.
Turn back with me to 2 Corinthians chapter 10.
He continues in verse 13.
First of all, we don't measure ourselves by those who commend themselves.
Those who strut around like peacocks, very proud of themselves and is very evident.
We don't measure ourselves by them.
But Paul gives us, secondly, something else we don't do.
We don't boast beyond the limits that God has allotted to us.
Look with me in verse 13, but we will not boast beyond limits.
It's the word canon.
Now children, we're not talking about the canon that you would shoot a large ball from.
We're talking about the canon, such as a standard of measurement, a rule.
We don't boast beyond
the right standard of measurement, but will boast only with regard to the area of influence God has assigned to us to reach even to you.
If I could translate it, Paul might be saying, boy, you are talking a big game.
That is some big shoes to fill.
And maybe that's what they're saying about him.
Look with me again, in verse 15, Paul says, we won't boast beyond limits, or it could be translated as boasting or rejoicing beyond the proper measure of authority and responsibility that God has given to us.
According to the measure or the limit of fear that God has appointed for the Apostle Paul, very clearly he says to reach even you
He would not be extending himself in his exercise of authority and influence in this church, even to them.
Acts chapter 16 says that God has appointed our dwellings.
God has sovereignly determined our law.
Psalm 16 says that God has drawn the lines of our dwelling in pleasant places according to his will.
And these false teachers seem to be boasting about beyond their limit in taking authority and ministry that God never appointed for them.
And isn't it so easy for us to do the same thing?
We've certainly seen that in many years ago in the life of our church.
But isn't it easy to do that in your home and your workplace to assume a measure of authority that does not belong to you?
Romans chapter 15, Paul says that he aims to preach Christ.
He's looking, he's looking towards Spain.
And he says that I aim to minister not where someone else is already building.
I have no desire to take credit for the labors of others, but I want to press forward where there is no work and when Christ is not named.
And he clearly says in Romans 15 that he's proud of his word.
There is a pride in that sense.
where we find satisfaction and we glory in what God's given us.
But he's so clear that he is plowing the field that God gave to him and how well we would do to remember that.
Friends, God has given you a field to plow.
He has given you a family.
He has given you a job.
And how easily we so often look beyond that, wanting more, looking
To our neighbor to plow his field, God has given you a field to plow.
Be faithful in plowing that field.
He says in verse eight that if he did boast of his authority, then his boasting wouldn't be in vain because God gave it to him and he used it to build them up and not to tear them down.
So we see in his life, model for us, one of the chief measures of a man and a woman,
In his humility, humility, he's been assertive.
Of course, he's been confident.
Absolutely firm, even authoritative.
Yes, but a humble assessment of oneself before God is very vital.
Listen to Romans chapter 12.
I say to everyone among you not to think of himself,
more highly than he ought to think, but to think with sober judgment, each according to the measure of faith that God has assigned.
It doesn't mean that you think of yourself too highly.
It doesn't mean that you think of yourself too lowly, which is a ditch on the other side of the road, but properly before God using his word.
Look with me in verse 13 again.
Seven times in this section, we see this word boast.
If you've been with us as we walk through first Corinthians and now second Corinthians, we have seen this word over and over and over negatively when a person exalts themselves.
And then positively, the word is also used when a person exalts Christ and his evidence of saving grace and work in our lives.
Psalm 49, 13 speaks of those with foolish confidence, yet after them come people who approve their boasts, which is the problem here in Corinth.
The Psalms often warn about this negative boasting.
Psalm 55 says, the boastful shall not stand before you.
Psalm 12 says, the Lord will cut off the tongue that makes great boasts.
You're talking to someone and all they want to talk about is themselves and their own glory and how great they are.
You say, God's going to cut that tongue off one day.
You're not going to be able to talk about yourself.
The wicked boasts on 10 says of his soul's desires.
Psalm 49 says, the wicked boast of their riches.
They boast on 42 of their evil.
They boast on 94 of their arrogance.
The wicked Psalm 38 says, boast against the righteous when their foot slips and they gloat over them.
Psalm 75 says, do not boast or lift up your horns, the Lord says.
I love how Proverbs 25 describes the boasters.
It's an overcast day.
The boasters are like clouds and wind without rain.
In other words, they promise a whole lot more than they can actually deliver.
Proverbs 27 says, don't boast about tomorrow.
You don't even know what a day will bring.
Isaiah uses this word often and says, shall the ax boast over the one who slings it?
We've seen this word over and over and over.
It's interesting that when you look at the vise lists in the New Testament,
And there's a list of what we would consider to be some of the most heinous sins situated right there in Romans chapter one, as well as in Jude 16, or loudmouth boasters who were despicable before God.
Second Peter says, they are like waterless springs, mist driven by a storm.
They are as stable as water.
I want you to see this as we trace it out there first and second Corinthians.
Look with me in 1 Corinthians chapter 1.
It's used nine times in 1 Corinthians.
In 1 Corinthians 1 verse 29 and following, the Bible says this, for most of you, not all of you, but most of you, that God didn't choose the noble things of the world.
He looks at the Corinthians and he says,
Pretty motley crew.
God chose what is lowly in the eyes of the world to do that, which is mighty.
And he quotes Jeremiah 9 just as Paul does in 2 Corinthians 10, 18.
And he says, so that no flesh may boast before God, but only in God.
1 Corinthians 3, 21, let no one boast in men.
1 Corinthians 4, 7, your boasting is not good.
Remember, anything that you have is a gift from God.
1 Corinthians 5, 6, you're boasting and putting out with this sin that you need to put to death.
1 Corinthians 9, verses 15 through 16, Paul says, I have the right to receive support from the church, but I reserve that right so that I may boast in a sincere and sacrificial ministry.
What does 1 Corinthians 13 for say about love, but love does not envy or boast.
Look with me in 2 Corinthians, turn back to chapter 1, verses 12 and following.
Paul says, the only boast I make is of a clean conscience and of a godly sincerity.
And he says, the church will boast in him as he does in them.
2 Corinthians 5, 12, he says, we give you reason to boast in us so that we don't have to commend ourselves.
In chapter 7, 8, and 9, Paul goes on and he says that he's boasting of God's work of grace in the church.
So there is a good boasting, a righteous pride in the work of God.
He says in 2 Corinthians 10 and following,
that his boasting is always within proper limits and that he boasts, but he boasts in his weaknesses.
And Paul says he boasts in his sufferings.
Friends, if we are going to boast, the last thing we're going to do is to boast in the things that we are weak in.
We spend most of our lives trying to come cover our weaknesses.
so that no one sees them.
The last thing that we would ever do is boast in our weaknesses.
And Paul is honest before the Lord because he says that it is in those weaknesses that Christ's strength is displayed and he gets the glory.
Paul says in Galatians, let the one that thinks he's something realized that he's nothing so he can boast honestly.
Or if there's anything to boast of, I boast, he says, in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Ephesians two says, our salvation is not a result of work so that no one may, what?
Do you realize how much Scripture speaks of this issue?
It's in nearly every book that you turn to,
We boast in nothing except the cross of Jesus Christ.
Turn back with me in the second Corinthians chapter 10.
Look with me in verse 14.
Again, he says, we are not overextending ourselves, stretching ourselves beyond measure, pressing ourselves beyond the proper limit that God has given to us.
In other words, hey, guys, stay in your lane.
How about that?
plow your own fields, stay in your lane, be faithful where God's put you and let him be the one that exalts you instead of you exalting yourself.
As though we did not reach you, for we were the first to come all the way to you with the gospel of Christ.
He's made so clear that he's their father in the faith.
He preached the gospel to them.
He raised them up.
He was the first to come to them.
And by no means has he gone beyond.
Himself in His authority.
He's an apostle.
He's seen the risen Lord Jesus Christ.
Thirdly, I want you to look with me in verse 15.
And we don't measure ourselves by those who commend themselves.
We don't boast beyond the limits that God has allotted to us.
But thirdly, we don't take credit for the work that others have done.
He says, we do not boast beyond limits in the labors of others.
But our hope is that as your faith increases, our area of influence among you may be greatly enlarged.
Other translations refer to Paul's team being enlarged by the church.
It seems to refer to being esteemed by them, them opening their hearts to faithful ministry, not being duped by false teachers,
And then his ministry taking a greater area of influence in their lives, the Word of God, sinking in deep, cutting out influences from the world and from false teachers.
And then he says, so that it would expand beyond you.
And all of my attention wouldn't have to be spent on you.
And so he's very clear that he will not take credit for the work of others.
but it's the work of God's disgrace he desires in their life.
As your faith is increasing, look with me in verse 16, so that we may preach the gospel and lands beyond you without boasting of work already done in another's area of influence.
Not taking credit for the work that other people have done.
The Bible says, listen, the harvest is plentiful.
The workers are,
few.
There is plenty of meaningful work to go around.
The handles are so big on the award.
There's enough for everyone's hand to be put to the plow without boasting of work already done in another area, another's area of influence.
Boy, this world and the people in it love to take credit for the work of other people.
Don't they?
Don't we?
We have an entire industry of copyrights and everything that comes with that.
We love to boast of what someone else has done as if it were ourselves.
And he says, I want to press on to another area where the gospel has not been preached, where health has not been developed.
And ladies and gentlemen, if you have been with us,
At least over the last few years, you know that this is what we have attempted to do as well.
A many years ago, when we have gone through many trials as a church, many of you who are with us very easily could have left and went to a more established church, a more established area, a more established ministry.
But instead, what we chose to do
is say rather than riding on the coattails of others.
Let's treat this like it is.
There's been so much good ministry that's come before us.
There are fathers and our grandfathers.
But for the most part, so much of it has become like an overgrown forest.
We can't even see our way anymore.
And no one had ever even heard of family worship over a decade ago, much less
practiced it.
And so what we did is said, let's, hey, let's get machete in hand and let's begin to clear this field out and let's establish the glory of Christ.
Let's grow together and let's establish a healthy, faithful local church.
It's not going to be fast.
It's not going to be flashy.
It's not going to be fancy, but we will get rooted and stable and we want it real before God.
And isn't that what the Lord has done?
Isn't that exactly what the Lord has been doing?
And it needs to be done beyond.
Finally, number four, look with me in your Bible.
So we boast in the Lord and live for his approval.
Here's what we do.
Second Corinthians 10, 17 says, Latin, the one who boast.
You want to boast?
You want to glory?
Then boast in the Lord.
Jeremiah 9 is where he quotes, and we read earlier this prophet who's weeping over the sins of his people.
Israel had rebelled against God.
God is disciplining them.
And the prophet says, don't boast in yourself.
Jeremiah 9 23 says, let not the wise man boast in his wisdom.
Why people love to boast.
about their knowledge.
Let not the mighty boast in his mind.
People love to boast about how strong and influential they are.
Let not the rich men boast in his riches.
People love to boast in their wealth.
But let him who boasts, boast in this.
Here's what matters that he understands and knows me that I am the Lord who practices steadfast love, justice, and righteousness.
in the earth, for in these things I delight declares the Lord."
So if you're going to boast, boast in that.
1 Corinthians 1, 27 says, let the one who boasts in the Lord.
God chose what is foolish in the world to shame what is wise.
It is amazing the amount of fruitfulness as a result of nothing
within myself that God has brought from this small little church tucked away in Elmore County.
It is amazing the fruitfulness that God has brought and the most unsuspecting of places.
And isn't that just like God?
My soul makes us boast in the Lord.
Psalm says, let the humble here and be glad in God.
We have boasted continually Psalm 34A and we will give thanks to
your name forever.
You have one man who's self-righteous, boasting that I'm not like those other sinful people.
And then you have another who threw himself before the mercy of God.
And the lesson is that God exhausts the humble and he humbles the exalted.
Verse 18, he says, for it is not the one who commends himself who is approved.
The idea is an approval after a period of testing.
Paul uses it in several other places.
It is not the one who commends or puts himself forward who's approved, but the one whom, what?
Verse 18, the Lord commends.
This is humility seeking the approval of God.
Ladies and gentlemen, if you live and die for the approval of the world, you are living a very small life.
Romans two says, our praise is not from man, but from God.
Proverbs 29 says, listen to me, the fear of man is a snare.
To be an approval junkie, you have to have the approval of other people.
You are constantly worried about what other people think about you.
Listen, Paul says in Galatians, am I seeking the approval of man or of God?
If my aim is to please man, then I can't please God.
Ladies and gentlemen, our aim is not to compare ourselves and commend ourselves before one another.
And our aim is not to win the approval of others.
end of this world.
You say, well, you are dog on the right.
I could care less about what other people think.
Well, let me just remind you, you should care.
You should care.
And that's a whole nother sermon.
But we don't live in a die by the approval of other people.
Listen to 1 Thessalonians, just as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the gospel.
So we speak not to please, man, but to please God who tests our hearts.
Do your best, Timothy, to present yourself to God as one approved, a worker who has no need to be ashamed, rightly handling the word of truth.
And this is the one whom the Lord will commend.
He'll do it in glory with the words, well done, good and faithful servant.
And he will even do it in the here and now as our lives align with this word.
How do we evaluate faithful ministry?
How do we evaluate ourselves?
Do we seek to tear others down or build them up?
Friends, this is how we boast.
Measuring ourselves according to the truth, humbling ourselves, focusing on the field God gave us to plow, giving praise to God and boasting in the Lord.
Let's go to the Lord in prayer.
Father, we thank you for the boast that we have in you and we are exceedingly grateful for your goodness to us.
Father, we
We pray that as we come before your table, or would you bless this time and strengthen us?
Would you turn us from ourselves to be found in you?
Brothers and sisters, we come this morning to the Lord's table.
As our own confession of faith says, the supper of the Lord was instituted by him.
The same night he was betrayed.
It is to be observed in his churches to the end of the age as a perpetual remembrance and display of the sacrifice of himself and his death.
It is given for the confirmation of the faith of believers in all the benefits of Christ's death, their spiritual nourishment and growth in him and their further engagement in all into all the duties they owe him.
The supper is to be a bond and pledge of their communion with Christ and each other.
I want you to prayerfully consider just for a moment the elements of bread, the cup that we raise together.
The signs in which they are importing us to Jesus Christ in all of us benefits, doing for us what we can do for ourselves.
And the fact that they are seals providing tangible assurance of the covenant promises of God, just as you have a letter, and then you have the wax that seals it, guaranteeing all of its contents.
We come together before the Lord to be strengthened by Him, to be renewed together as one body, to pledge our allegiance to Him, and to experience His nearness and be united to Him more and more.
Let's pray for the blessing and thanksgiving of God.
Father, we pray that you would search our hearts and that we would be found repentant and forgiven and assured before you.
Make us one with no divisions among us as we partake of the one love.
And Father, we pray that you would strengthen and sweeten and satisfy your people.
Draw us into further communion with you.
And we pray that you would strengthen our hands for the spiritual war in the week ahead.
May we be reconciled to one another in Christ.
And may we proclaim your death, hoping in it until you come.
So we give you things that we ask for your blessing.
In Jesus name, we pray.
Amen.